Hello, my name is Kornyshyn Vladimir Yurievich, I am a teacher at Moscow Business School, Project Management Institute, Russian University of Friendship of Nations, Director of Development of the Consulting Center, Academy of Consulting.
Today we will talk about strategic marketing. We will try to understand what it is, whether we need it, whether it is necessary for the business as a whole and for the Russian business.
We will try to find out what strategies we can use at the moment and how we can use them in Russia and in CIS.
The first question is about marketing management. We are trying to understand what is market-oriented management. You already know it, you have already faced it in marketing courses, but we are trying to understand what is the meaning of market-oriented management and what will be the connection with strategic marketing and marketing management.
Strategic marketing is a task that we must implement for a long time. It starts with tactical marketing or operational marketing, that is, marketing that will happen here and now.
We will talk about strategic marketing, what strategies can be used in various markets, in Russian, international, in the production and service sectors, and so on.
There are many strategies. Choosing the right one is one of the main problems that the business faces at the moment. Many entrepreneurs face the fact that they take modern literature in the field of marketing, in the field of strategic marketing, discover strategies, try to apply them, and it turns out that it does not work.
What is the reason? There are different phases of the market, there are different markets, there are special features of the implementation of certain marketing strategies, and we must know them. This is what we will talk about today.
In principle, there are a number of issues related to the features of the market, and the first question is whether we need strategic marketing at all.
Marketing is situational, and if you analyze the specifics of the Russian market, if we remember the 90s, then those who did not plan anything, who lived today, who focused on the situation, who tried to grab luck, focused on the market, those who planned, those who built long-term plans, all the time faced the fact that they turned into dust.
One of the issues we are trying to solve in this course is whether we need to find a solution or we can move away from the situation.
The purpose of our course is to form a vision of the role of marketing planning, marketing strategy in the activities of a modern business firm, to see when it is necessary to plan and to see when there is no time to spend on planning, it is necessary to solve the issues here and now.
The first section is dedicated to marketing management, and first of all, these are issues related to the transition from situational marketing to strategic marketing.
What is the marketing strategy? In fact, what are we trying to do? We are trying to see the future. We look at the future and either we see it or not. If we saw it, then we have two ways.
The first is to try to find the best position in the future. The second is to try to change the future if we don't like it and to make the future that has come what is necessary for us, for our company, based on our interests.
But for this we have to see the future. The future is difficult to see. Not in vain any Oracle tries to put as much smoke as possible on its predictions. As a result, we are often told by experts in the field of marketing.
Should we see the future or not? Should we try to understand this smoke or should we consider the present as a fact, the future as an incomprehensible and frightening event, and perceive employees as enemies who are not able to do anything.
The best they can do is to comply with our instructions. Why can't we delegate the authority as it is written in the textbook of the same management of personnel, management of production, etc.?
Partly because we don't know what our company will do today, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, and what things we will need.
If you ask your manager, your director, your owner, what will happen to us in a year, he will tell you what year, I don't know what will happen tomorrow. Can we make any plans in this situation? Obviously not.
On the other hand, do we need this? Or is it enough to know that there are moments, if we move away from this moment, it will give us the opportunity to be flexible and fast without thinking about any tactics.
The 90s say that yes, we can move away from the situation. World practice, if we open the same pages of Forbes, says that it's not quite so.
Ask yourself, what is better, $1 or $1,000? You made a choice. First of all, the first thought is, what is it? Naturally, $1,000 is a stupid question. $1,000 is more.
On the other hand, someone chose $1,000. Just in case. There is a trick in the game. What will be the right answer? The question will be, how often will you get it?
First of all, if you analyze the structure of leading companies, what companies will be on the list of leaders? McDonald's, which makes hamburgers, let their value be somewhere around $1.
General Electric, which makes bulbs, will be on the list of leaders. But we won't see the top ten companies, like Rolls-Royce, which makes expensive elite cars.
We won't see the same elite company as TVR, for example. What is it connected with? Let's take two stores, one that sells milk and another that sells chimneys.
Where is the client bigger? Where are the incomes more interesting? Where is the money more delicious? Where will the goals be more achievable? Milk. Milk is a product that cannot be called elite or expensive.
Chimneys are a thing. Let's say, the price of a chimney is $5,000. And the milk package is around $1. Nevertheless, if we estimate the milk, which is only 10%, and we buy milk every day,
then in the ideal situation we will have 365 turns in one year. And chimneys? Good sales for a chimney store, when a client comes and we sell at least one or two chimneys a month.
If we estimate 100%, the same chimneys, and turn them over in two years, because we will have to sell them all, we will get only 50%, or 50 kopecks per ruble.
If we talk about milk, the situation is different. 10% is a low estimate. I think everyone remembers the social goods price tags, where manufacturers promised not to increase more than 20%, but here it is 10%.
But if we calculate the capitalization, we can get much more money, 5,000% or even more. I'm not talking about the expenses for renting a room, warehouse services, etc., which will be much less for milk.
So what does it mean? The goods that turn over faster bring a much more valuable result, and international practice shows this.
On the other hand, there is our Russian practice of the 90s. We can sell fast money, which is better than long money. But if we open a list of leading companies, these are powerful corporations, production companies, etc.
This means that there is time for situational marketing, for strategic marketing, for collecting stones, for throwing them away.
What will happen if we analyze the Russian reality?
We are almost ahead of the rest of the world. We are a little behind the US, but we have 140 million inhabitants, and they have more than 300 million.
On the other hand, you will not find Russian brands in Forbes or any other rating, for example, Interbrand. And in our Russian market, companies that are foreign companies are mostly ahead.
Most of the big hotels, 4-5 stars, are members of big international hotel chains. The food market is, of course, Mars, Nestle, etc., but they are not Russian manufacturers.
The automotive market. What do we buy? AvtoVaz, which was in the top 40 of Russian brands in 2007, or Chevrolet, Ford, and other foreign corporations?
You know the answer. The specifics of Russian business are that there are more situational managers in Russian business.
Those who look at the market as a situation and are not able to predict this vision for a longer period. As a result, we have a paradox.
Having initially stronger sellers, we have much weaker companies than international ones. Take McDonald's for example.
McDonald's is a company that produces high-quality food. But what is the main advantage of McDonald's?
McDonald's is a company that has 5 small restaurants and a giant corporation that includes restaurants in 156 countries. And there are dozens of world's biggest, richest, strongest and most successful companies.
McDonald's has a lot to do with the production organization. They have a lot to do with the franchise, but it is easy to borrow.
On the other hand, if you take the advertising of McDonald's, you will find that it is quite primitive. McDonald's does not even adapt it for all countries in the world. It is just a translation ad for the US.
But it is effective. And it is on the B2C market, which means that it is quite effective in creating effective communication with the client. What makes it possible?
When is the consumer most vulnerable to advertising? Maybe you will say that when a person is nervous, when he has a need. But in this case, the list of our needs is already there.
If we want to eat and we are used to eating bread, we will buy bread. And when are we most vulnerable to advertising? When are we most open to it? In fact, it is in childhood.
The age category is somewhere around 8 years. If you look at the advertising of McDonald's, it is only for children. The advertising is aimed at whom? At a child. That is why it is a clone of Ronald McDonald, and the idea of a grandfather who goes to McDonald's with his grandson.
It is a very simple primitive advertising aimed at a child. A child perceives this advertising, and after a while, a teenager, after many years, comes to McDonald's and eats a certain number of the same burgers.
After a while, an adult brings his child and the circle closes. It turns out that there is a certain time gap. On the one hand, there is a point when a person is most vulnerable. 8, 10, 12 years, for example.
There is a point of his purchasing activity. 30, 35, 40 years. A 20-year gap. Those companies that can afford to work and advertise for a person who comes to them in 20 years, namely McDonald's, have actually achieved a gigantic result.
McDonald's has actually formed a new industry. If you look at the sales and consumption structure of the US market, you will find that they coincide. The sales structure of McDonald's and the growth of fast food.
They didn't have such a problem before fast food started developing, but now they do. And the US economy is already unable to break free from the clutches of such network giants.
An example that is not very ethical, but on the other hand, it shows high efficiency. Future jobs. When we start working and can afford to plan events not for the next year, but for 20-30 years.
If we take Russian companies, we see this market for a year or two. If we take statistics, we see that only 2% of companies are currently building plans in a certain format within the medium-term.
For the last 2-3 years, all other companies have been pushed away from the situation. The plan is purely formal. We don't see the market. The market is situational. In Russia it has already left. It remained in the 1990s.
In the world, the market is situational. It has left. For more than 50 years now, it is a predictable market, and it is trying to increase the predictability of all international institutions.
As a result, Russian companies, having great sellers and situators, are losing. This is the task of strategic marketing. On the other hand, the whole world, the whole business, basically, all went through the same stages.
One of the stages is Igor Ansov's, one of the leading experts in the field of strategic management. He described the issues of the company's collision with the market.
All companies, the whole world, the economy, all countries go through some stages. The first stage is, of course, control. We try to manage only our own organization. We try to decide where the control points are, where we can manage.
Then, if we have dealt with this task, we can move on to the second stage. We can start to extrapolate the received information and try to manage not only the organization, but also the closest environment.
The next stage is, we have accumulated some information, we have accumulated market vision, and we can predict. We can try to predict what will happen in a year, two, three.
And finally, the fourth stage is the option of the most flexible management, when we can manage not only the organization statically, but we can easily re-establish it for any goals and tasks that arise.
Russian companies are at different stages. Some are at the first, some are at the second, some are at the third, some are at the fourth. Your company is quite possible, and this is the most frequent option, is at the first or second stage.
Let's recall the same thing in 1998. Default. A huge number of people are trying to sell their assets and buy dollars.
Nevertheless, if you ask the managers of large companies that worked at the time on the financial markets, they will tell you that not in August, but in February, the latest, in May, everyone was aware that there would be a default, and they were sitting with some currency, getting rid of rubles.
Why? They could have predicted it. In this case, they were tied to international institutions that were involved in predicting changes in the financial markets, and it happened.
Decide for yourself, or recall, did you lose money in 1998, or did you earn it? I was with dollars, by the way.
Since defaults and other crises in our economy are inevitable, this is our game on the market, it would be better if your company, if we could predict changes and be flexible enough to adjust in case of a force majeure situation.
It would be better if we were at the third or fourth stage of strategic management of your organization. And your personal capital, of course. What's the difference?
There are different perceptions. In principle, marketing. Yes, there is an understanding of marketing as what? Market is a market, and it could be translated as marketing. There are rules of the game on the market.
How will we behave on this market? How is it customary? You can enter with a wide open door, and open it with a kick. You can enter politely. This forms a different perception and vision of the market.
One of the main questions that Russian managers face, and this is the vision that was formed in the US, is an attempt to look at marketing as a war.
Marketing is a war. Is it true or not? This is the question. In fact, the understanding of marketing as a military action is quite amusing.
Yes, we can use this terminology and perceive our advertising as art training, our managers as infantrymen, our top generals or senior officers.
Moreover, we use different tactics that came from military actions. In fact, almost any manager has read the works of Karl von Clausewitz, we all read the wars of marketing, and so on.
Is it true or not? If you take a practical example, then yes, if you open textbooks on military strategy, if you open textbooks on marketing, on the formation of actions on the market, you will discover a lot in general.
We have to decide what budgets we will have for offensive and defensive actions, what fortresses we will form on the market, what segments we will target to feel as strengthened as possible, what segments we will attack, and so on.
All these decisions, where to concentrate the main force of the attack, where to retreat, business is similar to the conduct of military actions. Moreover, a huge number of terminologies have entered our practice, which are purely military, such as, for example, the term brand kamikaze.
For more than 30 years, such a practice has been used on the market, and it is quite effective. When we create a brand, create a new brand, and launch it on the market, it has no task to gain some trust, market share, or anything else.
Its task is to impress the competitor's company and then die, by strengthening the main brand. This tactic is quite logical and can be highly effective.
Yes, we use guerrilla marketing. On the one hand, we try to analyze which territory we are operating on, and then we try to analyze which territory our competitor is operating on.
We identify the territory, just as the guerrillas did during the Second World War or during the Napoleonic Wars. The task is the same. We identify a weak point and strike there, and as inconspicuous as possible.
The task of guerrilla marketing is the same. There is a concept of camouflage. Indeed, the best option is to save money and nerves, and you will get the best result.
We try to build our tactics and strategy of action on the market in such a way that our competitors do not understand the meaning of our actions for as long as possible. If they do not understand the meaning of our actions, they will not be able to build a counteraction, and the subsequent effectiveness will be maximum.
Of course, we can use the tactics of evasion. In principle, direct confrontation is almost always a loss, and quite serious losses.
A company that starts to attack its competitor can face a classic example of advertising parity. For example, I have a store and you have a store. I decided to increase my market share, and I invested 10 million in advertising.
As a result, I won over additional customers. This is logical. The next year you were offended and invested 15 million. And you pushed me back. Moreover, you even won over some of my customers.
I was offended and invested 20 million. You invested 25, I invested 30, 35, 40, and so on. Please note that our market share is changing, but we are still stumbling.
But advertising budgets are growing. This is a very common situation, which is connected with the desire to fight more, not to do business.
The optimal option is to use the tactics of evasion. Take and step aside. It is possible to conclude an alliance, to conclude an agreement with the competitors, or something else, or simply to do the same rebranding, move aside and let the attacking company pass by.
And at the same time not to lose money on this push on the market. Naturally, we use the concentration of resources when we focus on a particular segment.
Or we invest money in a certain product, or something else, to achieve the maximum effect. As a private case, we can take the example of Brusilov's breakthrough.
The Russian tactics were used in the First World War. General Brusilov, by concentrating his army's resources on a small area, broke through the enemy's defense and won 25,000 square kilometers.
The same situation is used in business. Take TNT Express, which instead of competing in the North America or Europe markets, went to India, China, Brazil, markets that are growing, but weak.
And the giant's power was thrown there, and this allowed the company to strengthen.
The same strategy was used by Levi Strauss in the late 19th century, when they bet on one product, namely, jeans with rivets, which allowed them to achieve the maximum effect.
In the first year of sales, they sold more than 20,000 pairs of jeans, which was a colossal result.
Russia's top 15 advertisers
If we look at specific selling in Russia, for example, we can say that in 2007 they were number one in terms of sales in Russia
By the way, all of them are not Russian brands, but still
Sales increased by about 25%
And the volume of advertising funds increased by 37%
What does it mean?
It means that we are playing more war on the Russian market than we are doing business
Partly due to the fact that we are not ready to give up our competitors, partly due to the fact that we are not ready to give up ourselves, but the fact remains
In itself, the war and the perception of business as a war is, of course, radically wrong
To some extent, war is a private business, it's true
If we look at the war in Iraq, the reasons were, and we all understand, not to punish the evil Saddam Hussein
America needed oil, and Bush decided that this was one way to make money
Pay attention to what happened at the end
The US once again lost the market and exacerbated the economic crisis that was already growing
The same situation was with the war in Korea, the war in Vietnam
These wars were connected with an attempt to change the market, and nothing more
And all these projects were unsuccessful
Why? During the war, only the arms suppliers make money
If you are not ready to throw grenades at your competitors, which is also not effective in business
Then advertising agencies start making money
I hope that the managers of advertising companies won't be offended by me for revealing such a terrible secret
The advertising market is growing faster in Russia and in the world than the real business market
This means that the war is mostly on arms suppliers
The perception of marketing as a war is correct in that if companies can't find a place in the market, can't see their niche and their consumer
If they can do this, sooner or later the war will stop
This significantly increases the efficiency of the business
This is the first type of perception of marketing that exists at the moment
On the other hand, we can perceive marketing as a feeling
If you think about where marketing started, it started from the empirical phase
People feel the market, they feel how to sell, what to sell
Any seller has qualities to do this
He goes and starts selling, a buyer comes to him
And we feel what to say to him, what not to say to him
If we don't feel it, we won't be able to become good sellers
However, the empirical marketing has changed to the traditional marketing
Traditional marketing meant that it was a system of building actions, long-term planning, long-term vision, etc.
This is what we are talking about in this course
Nevertheless, if you look at the last 20 years, you will find that traditional marketing was also insufficient
And at the moment, not to say that it is in its place, but the next level is being built on it
If we look at the main driving force of most companies, it is the brand
How is one brand different from another?
In fact, what is the difference between Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola?
The color? Coca-Cola's Santa Claus is red, and Pepsi-Cola's Santa Claus is blue
That's it
On the other hand, if we look at the market share, we will find that Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola have different market share
They have different dynamics within the year, etc.
However, if you give the same consumer Pepsi-Cola, Coca-Cola, and remove the labels, most of them won't be ready to distinguish one from the other
If you don't believe me, you can try
Nevertheless, the product is almost identical, almost everything is identical, but the sales are different, the results are different
What is the reason?
If we talk about branding, the main idea we try to convey to the market is the idea of a certain feeling
This is where loyalty and commitment to the brand is formed, to our company
A person starts to feel a certain passion, I like this, I don't like that
I believe in this, but I don't believe in that
You can use different examples and express different emotions, but they give a certain result
I think many have seen the ad, it's not ethical, but the idea is clearly visible
The ad for Bentley, I won't repeat the idea, but there are races, and then there is a discussion about the Mercedes company giving away the prize to Audi for the best construction, for the highest reliability
Then there are races in Monaco, where Mercedes is giving away the prize to Volvo for the best design, and so on
And then the camera moves away, and a sofa appears, where a man is sitting and showing an unpleasant figure
And there is an inscription, and he has a surprised expression on his face, like, I don't understand what's going on here
And there is an inscription, Bentley
What is the idea of this ad?
It's clear, if I'm driving a Bentley, what do I need to congratulate Mercedes, Volvo, and so on, what do they reward each other with?
On the other hand, if you look at the market, you will see that Bentley, Audi, Volvo, Mercedes are in several different price categories, except for the premium models
The comparison was incorrect, why? Because the idea that Bentley put into this ad is a feeling of superiority
There are those who are like this, right?
In fact, this video is aimed at those who will react to this feeling
First of all, those who have just driven Audi, for example, a person who got a promotion and could potentially buy a Bentley
And he has friends who drive Audi, and he relates to this reference group
If we compared Bentley with Lamborghini, or with TVR, we probably wouldn't be able to convey this
Here's an example of what? Bentley thus forms a vision of its brand
Again, is it a correct vision? We won't even discuss this, it's a second question
The point is that this vision and this brand is not created on a name, but on a feeling, in this case, a feeling of superiority
Although, again, it's not a correct feeling of superiority
As one of the options, we can consider the idea of empirical marketing, which is actually made up of 5 components
What is it? What are we trying to form on the market at the moment?
The first is a feeling, the second is a feeling, the third is thinking, the fourth is action, and the fifth is a correlation
A person is trying to feel, or see, or relate to a character, to the person he sees on the ad, to what he reads in the ad
And, by the way, to our sales manager. Ultimately, this is also one of those characters that cause a feeling
If your sales manager, or your corporate manager, or just your client, looks like the client doesn't see himself in him, or what he would like to see there
Will you be able to form effective communication with your client?
Obviously, not.
As a typical example, we can bring to the company, or the idea of the advertising company, which used a well-known manufacturer in China, Ferrer Rocher
Ferrer Rocher had a problem. When they went to the Chinese market, they didn't have time to patent the appearance of their sweets
As a result, one of the Chinese manufacturers, you know, Chinese are a smart people, especially in terms of counterfeiting and making copies
One of the Chinese manufacturers managed to patent these things to a certain extent
And managed to create sweets that looked exactly like Ferrer Rocher's sweets
What could Ferrer Rocher do to protect its brand?
Only by creating a feeling of difference
Here's ours, here's not ours
Ferrer Rocher analyzed the product offered by its competitor and found out that everything was identical, except for a small detail
The Chinese manufacturer's golden packaging was painted
What did Ferrer Rocher do?
It created an ad, which contained the following
Guests come to the evening, they take out the sweets, they take them, and they see that when they unfold them, they have nothing left on their fingers
There is a difference, and this difference was included in the ad, in the message sent to the consumer, and the consumer heard it
The Chinese copy making specialist didn't switch
In most cases, even at the level of branding specialists, the brand is perceived as a set of symbols
Some formal ones, yes, an ad, images, people, etc. These are the concepts, the bricks from which we make a brand
But the truth is that anything can be done, the name can be similar, the color scheme can be combined, the only thing that can't be done is the feeling
This is the option we are striving for, and this is what the international market is striving for
But it is clear that it is most difficult to form a feeling, and it is most difficult to form a message, which should support our employees, who have to move from one level to another
The task is super-complicated, but theoretically it is solvable
If we take a list of the strongest brands in the world, one of them is Mercedes
Why did Mercedes strengthen its brand in the last 25 years?
In particular, because for more than a quarter of a century, Mercedes has not changed its main designer, who developed the concept of cars, brands, and brought it to the market
And every year, the feeling of what Mercedes is and what it differs from other cars is growing, and it is a clear understanding
There is Mercedes, there are other cars, although, by the way, in late 2007, it retired
Now we will see how Mercedes will try to keep this feeling of its brand, but nevertheless, it is a very illustrative and successful example
The second part of our lesson is dedicated to tactical marketing
What is it? Tactical marketing or operational marketing is, first of all, our attempt to work on the market here and now
We have tasks, how to organize, what price to put on this week, taking into account what happened on the market, what our competitors did, and so on
How to change our purchases, how to change our sales, how to correct the advertising campaign, how to communicate with the client who just knocked on our door and came to our office
This is what it is, tactical marketing. Now we are moving from simple to complex, although, in the end, we could go back to the opposite direction
If we have a strategy, we should end it with a tactic, with specific actions. If we have a tactic, ideally, it should not contradict each other
And we should be able to put it together into a single strategy. First of all, what is the value of tactical marketing? What is its importance?
We cannot take and not be able to work with the client. We cannot take and not know what price to put today on our price lists in the store, to indicate the price of the sheets, and so on
Without tactical marketing, without tactical actions, nothing happens on the market. On the other hand, if we hold some events, it often happens that when we start to put together these elements of tactical marketing
They contradict each other. Everything was done well, but in the end, everything is as always. A classic example is a company, salon of beauty, decided to invest money and hold a good advertising campaign on television
The advertising was done, the advertising was ordered, it was a good advertising that showed the best sides of the salon, including those that were absent in this salon
It was an advertising aimed at the premium class. Clients started calling, started coming, and faced the fact that this salon is not a premium class, it is a salon of beauty and economy class
People saw that there was nothing they expected to see from such a pompous advertising. We cannot say that working in the economy class is ineffective, it is a great business
We cannot say that the same specialists in advertising created an ineffective advertising. Why not? They started calling. There are just two elements of tactics. There is the action of selling salon managers, and there is the action of advertising managers
There is both tactics, and there is everything done well, and there is everything done well, but they do not work together, they do not connect. This is a classic situation.
If we take the Russian market, we have a lot of masters of tactics, and if we talk about various tactical solutions, even our managers could hold master classes for Western specialists
Although, the attempt to make it work together is the part that usually causes problems. In fact, any organization, any company that we can take as an example, will consist of the following elements
There are a number of key specialists, masters of the situation, masters of tactics, who can solve various problems, and everyone is waiting for them. There is a mass of specialists who perform background functions
As one of the top managers of a large organization, which employs more than 2,000 people, told me, no one works here except for the director. And he is right. The director makes all the decisions in their company, and all the rest are the executors
And they try to adapt to the decisions of the top manager. Is this the case for your company or not? I don't know, it's up to you to decide, but unfortunately, this is a very common situation.
Nevertheless, what can we say about tactics? First of all, can a boxer, a football player, an athlete, or a fighter, win without knowing anything about their opponent?
Of course, they can. Especially if you outperform your opponent by class. But even in this case, there are chances to lose, and quite big ones. If you are into boxing, you probably remember how Lewis lost to a little-known boxer for one reason.
He didn't prepare at all, and his opponent studied his opponent for months, adapted to his tactics, and as a result, knocked him out. Although, of course, he was just below the class level.
The same thing happens in business. Yes, we often solve our problems without building a single chain. We just work in class. We just believe that we are good specialists and we can solve any problem.
But this works only if our opponent is not ready and weaker. As a result, we are highly effective in the local and regional markets. Why? Because our competitors are usually companies that work by the same rules, with the same advantages and disadvantages.
In international markets, we are against companies that are ready. The same idea of a competitive analysis, which is a benchmark, all these elements came from the idea that we are trying to build our actions based on a certain environment.
At the tactical level, we are focused on the closest environment. At the strategic level, we are trying to expand it. There are many options.
In principle, if we don't want to consider a strategy, or if we can't, if we can't analyze the market, if we can't see what's there, can we work in the market? Yes, of course.
You already know that there is a PEST analysis for macro-media analysis, there are methods of industry analysis, micro-environment analysis, etc. All of this is there.
Nevertheless, if you take Russian practice, you will find that these elements are rarely used, or rather, are almost never used. If we take international practice, even the same PEST analysis, for example, on the US market, a complete analysis of all factors, even if we take the top 300 American companies, not 100% will conduct such an analysis, a little more than 70%.
Why? Because in order to conduct an analysis, to build a market vision and develop a strategy, it is necessary to go over a huge amount of material, to conduct a huge amount of analysis, to design, to consider various market development options, to assess and identify the quality and number of main risks, etc.
First of all, it is difficult, secondly, it is expensive, and thirdly, it requires a huge period of time. We can afford it, but not always. Moreover, do we need it?
If we are the top managers of large companies, such as NPO.com, or even MTS, it does not matter, then yes, we need it. And to some extent, our market is monopolized.
And if I have a beer stall, why do I need it? I am interested in only one question, how do I communicate with the client who will come to me? He came to me, looked out the window, by the way, if you look, one of the most stable companies in a number of Russian cities is the sector of business, for example, as a glass company.
In principle, these are companies that cannot afford anything, they cannot see the market, but nevertheless, the mass of glass companies exists since the Soviet period, their survival rate will be one of the highest in general, if we take the whole business.
The question is why? How do they do it? Thanks to the fact that they know their client. It is an almost perfect tactic, they are perfect for the client who comes to them.
We will do the same. If we cannot identify a strategy, we cannot form it, we will identify the main factors that will affect this strategy. And in the Russian market it is much more difficult to do than in the US or Europe, which are markets of high degree of openness, where the mass of information is created by commercial and non-commercial organizations, etc.
The Russian market is gray, it is a fog in which it is difficult to see anything, and we all understand this. Even those markets where the main transactions are made without cash, such as the steel market, are different to some extent, albeit not to the same degree, but to some extent, in terms of uncertainty and unpredictability.
But if you take the food market, medical services, or something else, all that is tied to the possibility of obtaining NAVA, all these markets in Russia are extremely gray.
For example, a company is sewing clothes, and their turnover is officially 20,000 rubles. Although, in fact, there is a whole sewing shop and so on, and the sales are currently in two regions of Russia.
A classic example, well-known to everyone. What will be at the level of official statistics, which we can use, for example, one way or another? Nothing, 20,000 rubles. What will be in reality? In fact, a fairly serious market player.
Therefore, in Russia, at the moment, tactics prevail over strategies, and this is right and normal. What are we doing to achieve this? For example, we are trying to build communication with the client. We assume that good relations with the client will not hinder in any case. This is a tactic.
We introduce the technology itself, and regardless of whether we need it or not, we do not quite understand what we will do with them and what it is. Most managers who are introduced to CRM sincerely believe that these are just software products. Although, in fact, this is a fundamentally different concept of marketing perception.
First of all, it is a different tactic. But that's not the point. The point is that if we start to form certain principles of market work, in the end we really rely on the client and on his relations. Therefore, the situation when we invest our money, our time, in increasing the client's loyalty, in increasing the skills of working with him, it pays off.
Similarly, it is a question of training our managers and investing in training and seminars so that we can increase the tactical skills of our employees. We do not know what exactly the employee needs.
We often perceive training and sales as a universal concept. The most in-demand service in the sector of additional education is training and sales. In fact, sales are the same.
We all know that there is a big difference between selling potatoes on the market and selling a large amount of steel, for example, in the UK. Why? It's not that there is a market and potatoes, and here is steel.
There are different rules of the game, different principles of business etiquette, and so on. There is no universal approach. Nevertheless, we consider it as a universal idea. We say that if our manager can speak, if he can contact people, he will figure it out somehow.
It's not right. It works, to some extent, and we still invest in it. Although, of course, the efficiency of such events will not be very high. Naturally, we invest in packaging.
We take and equip a beautiful office, we solve issues with the dress code of our employees who contact clients, and so on. So that our client comes, sees a beautiful package, believes that we are a successful company, and believes that he can work with us.
How true is it? It's not entirely clear. In fact, it's clear that if we work on the market, if a client or a partner comes to us, if he gets out of a beautiful car, wears an expensive suit, and everything is fine, he parks Bentley at the entrance and gets out in a suit from Brion, it's wonderful.
But we are really interested in the question of where he got all this from, or whether it's his, or if he rented it for 5 minutes, or if he has some huge credentials, and so on.
But which of us will be guaranteed to find out? And which of us will believe that yes, there is a suit, there is a car, there is a solid client? Well, if you want, he will have an office there, let it be. Again, beautiful and wonderful.
Most of them will meet a client or a partner in clothes. Similarly, we try to use the same rules of the game. We just use some features of the client's perception. This is a typical example of working with tactics, when we try to choose the option that will be universal.
As we said, the same option of CRM, for example, is a tactic. As a continuation of the CRM concept, we can consider the COV approach. What can we do here?
In the CRM option, we started to divide our clients by certain principles and build an individual approach, that is, to increase the quality of individual communications. In the COV option, we try to determine how much money the client brings us.
We can calculate the profitability of a particular client, the speed of his appeal to us, frequency, regularity, and so on, and calculate how profitable he is for us. We can use the same BC, XY for this analysis, but the essence is not important.
The essence is that we take and try to calculate this. COV is not one method, but a whole group of methods to determine the lifetime value of a client. But the point is the same. We need to develop an algorithm for the approach of working in the market.
We take and start calculating. We do not start from the strategy or the market. We take and start from the client who came to us. He comes to us, brings us money, and this is good. If he brings money regularly and does not cause us big losses, then he is a VIP client.
The company that uses the COV concept is a company that has been able to increase profitability, which is a popular approach in the world. This is a tactical approach, just a continuation of the CRM tactics that we are trying to implement in a number of companies with different degrees of efficiency.
First of all, the main advantage is that we do not take into account the market. We work with the situation. Tactics prevail over strategies. Of course, tactical marketing should be interconnected with the strategic events that we form.
They should be combined and mutually strengthen each other. But this is a task that not all our companies are capable of solving. And not only ours. It is the same with international practice. The same concept was introduced by a company that had a turnover of almost a billion dollars at that time.
Nevertheless, they abandoned the strategy in favor of tactics, which brought them a lot of income and brought them to the next level. Nevertheless, the issue that we have in our topic is the basis of strategic marketing. Therefore, we would like to switch from tactics to strategy, which we will do in the third section.
What is strategic marketing?
Strategic marketing is a method of marketing in the context of the analysis of the needs of individuals, buyers, and organizations. We consider it as evolution in the market. But we can also use any other approach. The main issue that strategic marketing solves is very simple.
There are events, one after another. There are annual events, there are events aimed at the future. Strategic marketing tries to put all this together.
All these things, in the end, were built into a marketing plan. There is a product, it is oriented to certain needs. There is a market, there is a market dynamics.
We try to segment this market, to identify priority segments, plan our events, and in the end we should get what? We should get a sales forecast, and this should be planned in the long term.
At the moment, most companies, including yours, are not ready to answer the question of what sales we will have. We assume that, based on the analysis of previous periods, we will sell for 2 million last summer.
This month we will probably sell for 2 million, or we will, or we won't. We don't know this. We just assume. Why? We don't know the factors that shape the market, and we can't say, next year I will earn 2 million, and if I do this, I will earn 3 million.
Therefore, it makes sense to invest money in these events. By the way, if we take marketing events, again, the same as one of the examples, pay attention, both in the world and in Russia, the BTL sector is increasing. What is this connected with?
What attracts advertisers to BTL? Theoretically, it gives instant results. The company is trying to leave the strategy and tactics sectors. BTL events were held, and it was either effective or ineffective. The question is solved.
We planned a long-term program, a media plan for a year or two, for example, God forbid, for 15 years. How to evaluate it? Are you ready to sign a deal that will have such a volume of sales, and, based on this, we can allocate such a volume of money for advertising events, promotion events, or something else?
Are we ready to invest in industrial development or something else? It is clear that no. Russia is a very indicative country in this regard. Why? Pay attention.
Russia is the only country where there are experimental companies that feed on the new scientific and technical developments. Almost all customers are Western companies, and they work for the order. Russian companies do not risk working with this.
We all know that the source of super-profit in any market is innovation. What is innovative in Russia? Nothing special. We all know where the money is coming from. Thank God, we have a lot of oil, and the oil prices are rising.
The same strategic marketing planning can be presented in three elements. We cannot make a plan right away.
We have to make a plan based on the situation in the country, on the price of education, on the change of the assortment policy, on the promotion policy, and so on.
We have to implement this plan. We have to put it on paper, build a system of key parameters, and only then can we implement it. We cannot build a plan and implement it right away.
The question whether we are ready to name the key parameters based on which we will manage marketing is one of the key questions. If you are not ready, you will not be able to implement the business process.
We all know the Pareto rule, 20 to 80, 9 to 90, it does not matter. The main idea of the Pareto rule, the ABC system, and all the other things that are the basis of management, we all know what is the key in our activities, and what is less important.
And this is the critical zone. If we find it, we are ready to manage it. If we don't find it, I don't know where the steering wheel is, and where the gas and brake pedals are.
Even if the car moves from its place, I will have some problems. Until the car goes straight, there will be no one, no other cars, the road is good, a small hill, and so on, I will drive.
If we compare the Russian business with the road, it is a road with many cars, it is not straight. By the way, in the rating of the worst roads, our roads take the first place.
For example, the Federal Highway Moscow-Yakutia took the first place in 2007. The same is true for our business. And you never know who will turn out from where.
Therefore, an effective control system is a key issue that must be solved before we can say, yes, we have a plan, and I am ready to implement it.
What is the specificity of strategic marketing? First of all, we can approach the formation of this marketing plan in different ways.
A fairly common option is to form strategic marketing events based on the life cycle of a company or product on the market. This is a common approach, it is simple, understandable, although not fully valid.
As an option, we can develop an intensive marketing strategy. For example, if we are in the first phase of the life cycle, our task is to invest actively and wait for profit to reinvest it in the market.
We can take a different position and try to choose a strategy of penetration, when we stimulate the return of the profit, while waiting for someone to come to us.
We can take a strategy of wide penetration, when we try to cover the market, and as a result, our investments in advertising and promotion will be much higher.
We can take a passive position and not take risks. If, for example, the last phase of the life cycle is in the middle of a deadlock, it is logical to sit and wait for a client without investing money.
We can build our strategy based not only on the life cycle, but also on other parameters, for example, the market we are in. The market can be global or local, there are quite a variety of options.
We have an option of geographical expansion. When the market is large and global, we will acquire more volume, and we will have a strategy of leadership of Michael Porter's shares.
The point is that we should control as much territory as possible, that is, extensive growth, not intensive. This is also one of the marketing strategies.
We can choose a strategy of differentiation and stand out, for example, by brand, by brand, we can stand out by some other parameter. There are quite a lot of options.
In the end, any parameter can be positive, neutral, or even negative, but we will be remembered. Although the game with the negative, which our companies sometimes like, is controversial and rarely has a positive effect, but nevertheless.
This can be a segmentation strategy, which is present in any small business, when there is a wild self-segmentation, and thanks to this, a small company has high levels of profitability. Why?
Because the store manager goes out to the clients, communicates, but we could do the same in the second and third stores.
The main factor of success was that the store manager went out and started communicating with people who were close to him. That is, he found his segment, he found the part of the market that he himself was related to.
But when he moves to the next segment, for example, the segmentation itself will no longer work, and as a result, he will have a serious drop in business efficiency and profitability. In the second store, he opens and the results are worse. In the third store, even worse.
This is a fairly common story. Or, for example, during the growth of the same company, the wholesale company. Nevertheless, this is also a logical approach and one of the options. Although we can try to approach this in a classic way and differentiate the market, break it segmentally, identify the key parameters for segmentation, then for identifying priority segments, for determining the criteria for attractiveness, and so on.
This is also an approach to segmentation that can increase the efficiency of our marketing activities. This is also one of the strategies.
The question arises. Yes, there are strategies. What we have listed is just the beginning. There are many, many more strategies. There are almost hundreds of strategies and approaches that we can use.
Why? The market has evolved, marketing has evolved. In fact, the first descriptions of the principles of market work can be clearly attributed to the 17th century, and we can even find things earlier.
The market has changed a lot in the last couple of thousand years. It has changed a lot in the last hundred years. There were market deficits, consumers, buyers, and so on. There were various transition markets, and so on.
We can continue this process almost to infinity. Therefore, when choosing the right strategy, the main thing we should remember is that the market analysis should give us a set of tools that will correspond to the market data as much as possible.
So, how to organize the work of the marketing service so that we can solve the tasks we have set for us in terms of strategy formation and implementation of the strategy chosen in practice?
First of all, as we said, the main issue when forming a strategy is to find specific indicators. What will these indicators be? Ideally, it will be the sales results.
Nevertheless, sales results are not the only objective indicator. There are a number of other indicators, but they are connected to two points that you already know and have seen in the matrix of Boston Consulting Group.
These are market share and growth rate. The main idea is that if we try to analyze what goals we have achieved in the market, the question arises how effective we are compared to the competitors, the expected players, and so on.
If our company develops faster, if we have a larger market share than other companies, then we can objectively say that our strategy is formed with less mistakes than our competitors'.
In any case, we form plans and try to get specific indicators. Sales volumes, growth rate, market share, and so on. In the end, competitive analysis, when analyzing a chosen strategy, is the shortcut that separates marketing from theory.
By the way, we often consider strategic marketing as a theoretical game. We sit, think, imagine, and everything can happen. But in practice, there is one question.
We can either sell or not sell. The third is not given. If we sell, our market share increases, but the number of competitors decreases. If we do not sell, the situation is the opposite.
The main question when forming a strategy is that 95% of what we do, especially at the development stage, is related to the theoretical vision of the market, the assumption of development in this market.
But in the end, it all comes down to one thing. The real position of the company and the real sales results that show our results objectively and specifically.
Naturally, when we form the same marketing structure, we try to get the marketing strategy, we get more than one element that we need to consider.
And not even 4, as we studied in the framework of the marketing mix, for example, 4P, or if you like more extensive options, 5, 6, you can add S or any other elements of the marketing mix.
The first thing we will start with is marketing research. This research is the source of information based on which we try to say that there is a market situation and we can do this and that.
By the way, if you ask most managers what marketing research is, they will most likely say that it is a market research or something like that. We take something and look for something.
In fact, this is not true. First, market research is market research, and marketing research is marketing research. Two different words.
The second main reason is that if we conduct marketing research, there is marketing monitoring, but this is not marketing research.
What is the peculiarity of marketing research? Marketing research means that we have a certain assumption, also called in practice a working hypothesis, which we want to refute or prove as a result of our research.
We have a goal, we have a question, and we are trying to find an answer to this question. For example, I assumed that the use of the loyalty tactics for clients, for example, for a shop of elite decorative items, would be highly effective.
Is this true or not? Or maybe I should invest money and it will be more effective in mass advertising? What is right?
If we take a recent story, the beginning of the new millennium. It sounds very scary and significant.
Two networks are formed. The cross-chain network, the five-chain network. The cross-chain is formed in Moscow, and the five-chain is formed in St. Petersburg.
The cross-chain is organized by managers who have a marketing education, they are oriented to the Moscow market. They ask a consumer, because it is written in textbooks on marketing,
if you don't know what to do, ask the consumer, he will tell you. And they ask him, what do you want? As a result, the consumer starts to answer, if you ask yourself what you want from a shop of products.
Most often, people answer, assortment, good service, good prices, parking convenience, managers of the company, at the moment of creation,
I won't go into the ethical aspects, I won't reproduce the history of the company's creation, but it is clear that they had minimal preparation in the field of market understanding.
The only thing that the five-chain did, thanks to a number of non-market factors, was to get a place in the aisle under its shops.
Since then, a number of years have passed. The five-chain is a leader in the retail sector, not only in Russia and the CIS, but also among the top retailers in the world.
In terms of sales volumes, profits. The crossroads is currently part of the X5 Retail Group, the managing company of the five-chain. Thanks to what?
Thanks to the fact that the five-chain, albeit empirically, did the right thing. We all know that for shops, supermarkets, it is not only an optimal format for most consumers, but the only and most important parameter for most consumers is closeness to home.
They are ready to close their eyes on many things, if they can come at the end of the working day, buy, buy, buy, and go home. This is important for them.
Yes, for us, service, assortment, etc. are important, but we are ready to close our eyes on this, and these are secondary factors.
We want this, but we are not ready to pay for it. I am not even talking about money. We are not ready to go to a shop that is a kilometer away, we went to the nearest one.
The five-chain will be a crossroad, or some other network. In fact, for us, it will be a secondary moment. The market is changing, of course, priorities are changing, but nevertheless.
At one time, the bet on this parameter allowed the company to turn from a small regional network into a market leader. Although, in the future, a number of other reasonable things were used, but nevertheless.
At the same time, a crossroad, for example, is a company that has conducted research on the market, but it has done it wrong. Why? The peculiarity of the Russian market is that it is not a consumer market, where the consumer gets what he wants,
and if we ask him, as it will happen in Europe, the consumer will answer what he wants, and in the future he will do so. I want this, so I buy this. This is the consumer's answer, starting from the so-called middle class.
In Europe, the middle class is a bone. In the US, 55% of Americans live below the middle class, so even there it is very reasonable.
In Russia, the middle class is a poor stratification, if we objectively assess it based on international statistics, then the middle class is a person who has stable income and confidence in tomorrow and can afford to buy the cheapest real estate.
The criteria are approximately the same as in the US and the UN, but the essence is not important. We see that the real estate market is unstable, but we can say that the middle class is a small part of the population, less than 10%
This means that most of the market will be formed by people who say one thing and do another. Therefore, the choice of marketing research should not be based on surveys, but on observing the real behavior of the consumer.
This is just one example. We do not set a goal to tell the course of marketing research, this is a completely separate course. But this is a typical example that it is impossible to form the right strategy of development if we initially ask the market the wrong question at the level of data
If we ask the wrong question, we get the wrong answer. And most importantly, we do not see this market, we do not know what to ask it. In the future, we can develop products, price policy, communication policy, product movement policy
You can build other elements if you like other options of the Marketing Mix complex, but this is the second stage, the second element, the second overhaul
At the moment, there are a lot of sources of marketing information, which will be very different, especially considering the realities of our market
It is extremely difficult to find qualified experts in the field of marketing and marketing research. Research will be conducted, but we remember the fate of the intersection, and not that the network is over, not that it is broken, but nevertheless
At a certain point, it has passed under the patronage of its competitor. Why? First of all, because the bet on secondary, non-key factors, if we have formed a strategy based on this, does not mean that you will be ruined
It only means that you will develop much slower than your competitor, and then either he will eat you, or you will leave, or you will change your market goals. This is also an option
In fact, the lack of readiness of the marketing service to ask questions and to name specific results indicates that the marketing service is not ready to work in the sector of strategic marketing
It is possible that they are able to develop great promotion events, advertising campaigns, sales incentives, if they know their client. This is a strategy. But it means that they are not able to develop a strategy in general, and for this you will need other specialists with a different vision and knowledge, if you find them
If we organize the work of our marketing service, we try to make it able to solve strategic planning tasks, then we need to establish priorities, based on which we will try to move somewhere
In fact, there are only two priorities. What can we want in the market? Option 1, we can want money, and this will be a strategy to maximize profits. Option 2, we want to live, and in this case our efforts will be aimed at forming a strong position in the market and creating prospects for development
Both options are good. The only bad thing is that you can't get both at the same time. In the simplest case, if a client comes to you, a good seller can give a lot to the client, because of a serious price increase, and as a result get a super profit
But what is the probability that this client will come back to us again? Unfortunately or fortunately, it is not great. Therefore, we try to build this system based on two main directions, which you need to define and draw a conclusion
Yes, I want money, yes, I want market power, market prospects and a market future. This is the first. Second, one of the biggest problems facing marketing service and organization of work on forming strategic marketing tasks and on implementing these tasks is the presence of a clear mechanism, or rather, its absence
If we take our companies, unfortunately, even at the level of production and service, we don't always have a clear business process, we can't always say what our employees are doing, what they should do, and so on
But there is management for this, there is project management, and it has existed in the world for more than half a century, and even more than 100 years, because if you take one of the founders of scientific management, Frederick Taylor, you will find that he writes about the same things we are talking about
The question is, if we are talking about marketing service and the construction of marketing events, then here the control system and the concretization system of these events becomes even more complex and requires a clear vision
If I want to get a part, a screw, a bolt, for example, I have a description of this screw and this bolt, or I want to make a dish, a simple omelet, I have a description, I know how this omelet should look like, I have a technological process, and I can take it and assign it to someone
If I come and see that my omelet is burnt, I guess that everything is bad, if I see that the bolt doesn't correspond to the TZ, I say that everything is bad, if it corresponds, then everything is fine
As for marketing activities, there are two options. The first one is what I can want on the market. The second option is money. What can we do to get money?
Well, if you think about it, the standard answer that people usually say at seminars and so on, or just in the process of live communication, is to work. But in order to make a lot of money, you have to work a lot. It's logical.
For example, Vasya the cleaner has 6 plots, he works 23 hours a day. And Bill Gates, he also has a big, unregulated working day. He comes at 9 a.m., works until 11-12 p.m.
The working day is shorter than Vasya the cleaner's, and his salary and income are higher. And the company is bigger. Vasya the cleaner saved up for a supported Zhiguli, and Bill Gates donated $2 billion for charity.
Different formats. Why? Different results, different goals, different tasks, and different market vision. I can want money, but how can I build my strategy, work with my employees, what will I demand from them?
To work. So how do I evaluate my employees? I come in, and the one who is in front of me works. The one who is sitting on the ceiling doesn't work. It's logical.
On the other hand, I can set a goal. Increase sales volume by 30% during the year. This is a specific goal. I start to build specific events.
30%? What do I want for this? What do I need for this? How will I do it? Let's do it this way. 30% of them will be 60% due to increasing sales volume for old clients, and 40% due to increasing sales volume for new clients.
For example, new clients. I know the effectiveness of my events, so what do I need? Who is my new client? Let's say it's B2C. Who is it? Young people. What do they do? Where can they get information? Let's say they listen to the radio.
What do I need? I need an advertising manager who will work with the experience of creating audio ads, etc. I have a clear plan. When do I need it? I need this manager with these characteristics in a month.
In a month, he has to put me on the table with the action plan. Then I will have a critical system of critical indicators. Then these videos will be released. These are the indicators of efficiency.
The same with old clients. What will I do? I can use the same direct mails for sending them. Their efficiency is this. I need this staff, this equipment, etc. This is the concretization. I built my marketing events based on a specific goal.
By the way, the goal I just mentioned is the goal of one of the companies that really set it for themselves. They not only achieved it, but even implemented it. They had a market goal and a real vision of what they really want to do.
In this case, we can achieve this goal. If we find out that the goal is not achieved, we can make a correction. We can correct it. If my assessment is whether it works or not, what can I do if everything went wrong?
I planned a sale volume of 100,000, but it's 80,000. What can I do? I will tell you what we usually do. We scream. This is a good option, but it doesn't help. It only creates hypertonia and headaches.
As an algorithm, how can we use these clear indicators? What can we do to get to them? What can we do when developing this plan?
First, we need to conduct a situational analysis. You have already done it on other modules, or you will do it, depending on the sequence of the lecture.
This is a question of goal formulation. We will talk about it in detail. The goal of the assumptions is understood in strategic marketing, strategic management, and management.
This is one of the conceptual tasks before the organization, although I hope that the story I just gave is clear. What are the specific goals? How are they formulated?
It should be on the market, and we can take it. Here it is. This is a question of strategic planning, based on the analysis and the goals. We build and check the plan. Is it real or not?
How will you analyze it? There are many options. There are many options for building a system of goals and going to the plan. There is a control system, starting with a simple gap analysis, where we make cuts and control the system of gaps.
A gap is a gap. The plan is planned, the plan is achieved. To some extent, most project management systems are built on this. And we finish with more complex options of dynamic control of goals and tasks.
And this is a question of strategic planning. We started with it, but we always finish with it. The strategy should go to the tactics. If I have a strategic plan, the most important thing I should say is that I can't come to my salesman or janitor with the same strategic plan and tell them,
I have this strategic plan. No, it's for the politicians. They say the general words and don't answer for anything. In business, such things don't happen. Unfortunately or fortunately. I like that they don't happen, so fortunately.
But the idea is that at the end we should form specific goals and tasks for each employee. The janitor should be here from morning till noon. The sales manager should make this algorithm and submit it to his client and form this proposal.
The advertising manager should give this ad in this volume, place, time, form, etc. The external ad should be like this. Should it be like this or should we replace it with something more effective? This is the tactics.
By the way, at the level of tactics, we have a lot of wild marketing, situational marketing, in the most primitive version. If we take a good example, because it's obvious, it's advertising. Pay attention.
We all know that if we take the consumer sector, 80% of purchases are made by women. Theoretically, that's why we watched the movie What Women Want. That's the problem of American advertising agencies.
The market started to change, we found out that the buyer is a woman, and new top companies started to come. That's what the plot of this movie is built around. It's a normal situation. The movie is quite old.
Our companies noticed that, at least it's written in articles, books, etc. But if you analyze advertising, you'll find out that it's mostly male.
But it's two big differences. Men and women perceive colors and geometry of images differently. If you take the most banal example, a catalog with faces, you'll give men and women to choose what they like, beautiful faces.
Men and women choose different faces. But advertising is mostly male. Why? The answer is simple. Our companies are not able to form a TSE even at the level of tactical events for an advertising agency.
Advertising agencies are based on the idea of client-oriented, not on the buyer, but on the customer. David Carnegie said a wonderful phrase a long time ago, I love strawberries with cream, and fish likes worms.
So when I go fishing, I take a jar of worms with me. If we analyze what we do, the advertising our companies release, we'll find out that we mostly advertise strawberries with cream.
Why does it happen? We don't know what we want. Advertising agencies are based on the idea of client-oriented, not on the buyer, but on the customer.
Since we mostly have male customers, what does the advertising agency do? It just agrees with the customer, shows them a poster with a girl with minimal clothes, and asks if they like it.
What else should the client say? They like to say, or promote, that they spend 10 million, but I don't know if it's a lot or not.
Another thing is that monsters like Walmart can't control the effectiveness of their events, because they work on a globalized and huge market, and they have to control hundreds of thousands of communication channels.
And for them, precise effectiveness is impossible. But we, our companies, work on a relatively small market, and still can't control even selected tactical events. Why? We don't have criteria for evaluation, we don't know what we're facing.
This is the problem we face in front of the marketing agencies, and only a few companies in the Russian market can solve it.
If we talk about strategies, marketing, what else should we consider? First, we should clearly understand that these strategies are implemented at different levels.
There are three formal levels that are usually highlighted. The first level is corporate, which is the answer to the question of what business we do. The question that Lamben brought to us, and we are looking for an answer to it.
The second question is business unit strategy, which is how we will compete at the level of a single business unit. And the third question is functional level strategy, which is at the level of a division, or even a single employee.
What strategy will be there? Why can't we come up with a strategy? Usually, because these three levels don't intersect. Structural divisions, in order to form a strategy, must get a business unit task, and business units must get data from the highest corporate echelons of power.
On the other hand, the question is where do we get the information from? We get it from outside, which means that most of the flow is from below, not from above.
Yes, we can implement changes from below and from above, but if you look at the practice of modern business, and not only in Russia, but this is recognized by Western specialists, the Harvard Business School, it is not important.
First of all, in order to implement changes effectively, we must initiate them from above, but above must understand that it is necessary, and the information must come from below.
In other words, we must gather these three levels. Can we gather and compose them and get three strategies that will be like three levels, like three steps in a pyramid, interconnected, and will stick to each other?
Yes, we will get a normal, effective strategy. We won't be able to do it. The strategy will not work.
On the other hand, marketing is a thing that is different from some uncertainty. It is impossible to predict the market.
When we talk about strategy formation, market analysis, marketing based on strategy and analysis, we must clearly understand that there are limitations.
We should not give up on intuition and move only to planning.
What is the job of any consultant? A consultant can give analysis, can give a strategy, but in the end, the decision must be made by a leading manager, not a consultant. Why?
Because if a manager has achieved some success as a result of growth in this structure, in this market, he has an intuition.
It is impossible to predict the market. Moreover, despite the fact that there is a concept of risk and uncertainty in business, and we understand risk as measured uncertainty,
if you take into account the definition of risk in project management standards, in the practice of modern business, modern marketing, this concept often contains uncertainty.
We say that we cannot predict everything. This is one. And as a result, we cannot plan everything. This is two.
What can we do about it? We must start not only from plans, not only from analysis, but also from the situation.
As one of the options, we can implement a strategy of trying to make the best of our plans at any time.
Of course, within the framework of the general direction, we cannot change the structure radically, but there are always some options.
The absolute detail of the marketing plan is impossible in principle. This means that we can always make adjustments.
In fact, this strategy will be based on the idea that we can always redistribute resources in some way, we can always redistribute the methods we use,
we can always redistribute the methods we use, and as a result, get a slightly better result than it was initially planned.
Why? Something has changed. If something has changed, it means that we can see a better way.
Sometimes such a strategy is called a strategy of visible business, that is, we start from what we can really do at the moment.
What exactly can it be and how can we implement it? The first task is to try to find, to try to formulate this key problem, which can give us improvements.
For any phase of the project, for any phase of the business, there is some key element, it will vary, we can find it and we can improve it.
Secondly, what is it? What can be this element? Are there any restrictions or can it be anything?
Naturally, there are restrictions. We must start from what? First, our staff must be ready to make these changes and they must want to make them.
Otherwise, we will face the classic situation of resistance to changes. Any manager, any employee, always resists changes.
By the way, he will resist these changes depending on his rank. The higher he is on the hierarchical ladder, the more he will resist such changes.
It is more difficult to control uncertainty, and so on. If people are not ready, you will spend a lot of time, energy, nerves, and as a result, you will get worse instead of better.
Secondly, this task should give us short-term results. Here we improved this, and as a result, we got a clear improvement in performance.
And, accordingly, an additional element. What would we ideally want? Ideally, we would like the resources we need, administrative, financial, etc.,
to be within the limits of our business and project. This is the element of our work.
Although, theoretically, there are unlimited opportunities for improvement, the number of such key factors rarely exceeds 1-2 at each stage.
If the staff is ready or not ready to work with them, the number of such factors, if we exclude those with which the staff is not ready to work, will remain very few, and not even at each stage.
But they can be found. And this can really increase the efficiency of your business, your project, and, accordingly, the implementation strategy.
Marketing
Analysis
Development
Conclusion
During this course we have discussed the main points related to marketing management.
We have mentioned that management should be driven only by market goals.
The task can be formed only by understanding its place in the market today, tomorrow and in a year.
We have discussed that there is tactical marketing and discussed some options.
Of course, there are many options, but you work with them every day and know them well.
We develop and improve them.
We have discussed strategies.
Even though we have discussed the most common options, we can deepen them in the future.
We can study and read them, but in the end we can ask questions.
Thank you, goodbye and good luck in learning new courses.